# Internationalization and Localization

## Babel

## Marking strings for translation
In order to translate strings, they have to be marked. This ensures that they will be picked up by the extraction process later on. Only strings which are visible in the UI have to be translated.

### Python
Marking strings in python is done via the `Flask-BabelEx` package. First, make sure to import the package and the `*gettext` function. We usually import it as `_` to be consistent throughout different packages.

```python
from flask_babelex import lazy_gettext as _
```

Now strings can be marked for translation:
```python
error_message = _("Invalid scheme")
```

Certain data, identifiers or keywords do not have to be translated. This can be achieved with string interpolation:
```python
_("Invalid {scheme}").format(scheme)
```

Adding notes for translators helps them to better understand the context where this string will be used:
```python
# NOTE: This is displayed in ....
_("Invalid {scheme}").format(scheme)
```

#### Jinja Templates
The `gettext` function is made available in jinja templates as well:
```js
<p>
    {{ _('Only published versions are displayed.') }}
</p>
```

### JavaScript
Marking strings in JavaScript is done via the `i18next` module. First, make sure to import `i18next` from the module.
```js
import { i18next } from "@translations/invenio_app_rdm/i18next";
```

Now strings can be marked for translation:
```js
<p>
    {i18next.t('Only published versions are displayed.')}
</p>
```



## Lazy vs non-lazy


## EDTF localization


## Storing timestamps

- Always in UTC
- Localize on display

## Storing strings

Unicode - UTF8


## Extracting Strings
After strings have been marked for translation, it is now time to extract them. Instructions on how to do so can be found in the respective package in the file located at `.tx/config`. Depending on the packag, only Python or JavaScript may be available for translation.

### Python

#### Configuration

- In the root folder of your package update the `.tx/config` file:

```
[main]
host = https://www.transifex.com

# python conf
[<parent_namespace_of_your_transifex_projext>.<package_name>-messages]
file_filter = <package_name>/translations/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/messages.po
source_file = <package_name>/translations/messages.pot
source_lang = en
type = PO

```

- also in the root folder add `babel.ini` if not there:

```
# Extraction from Python source files
[python: **.py]
encoding = utf-8

# Extraction from Jinja2 templates
[jinja2: **/templates/**.html]
encoding = utf-8
extensions = jinja2.ext.autoescape, jinja2.ext.with_
```

- remember to add your new language to the instance configuration by modifying `I18N_LANGUAGES` variable

##### Usage

In the root folder of the package run
```
python setup.py extract_messages
```
This command will gather all the marked strings from .py and jinja template files, group them by their ID and place everything in the source file specified in the config (usually at `<package_name>/translations/messages.pot`).

### JavaScript

#### Configuration

Navigate to the `<package_name>/theme/assets/semantic-ui/translations/<package_name>` folder.
Create following folder and file structure:

```
|-messages/
|          |-index.js
|-scripts/
|          |-compileCatalog.js
|          |-initCatalog.js  
|-i18next.js
|-i18next-scanner.config.js
|-package.json
```

in the root folder of your package update the `.tx/config` file:

```
[main]
host = https://www.transifex.com

# react conf
[<parent_namespace_of_your_transifex_projext>.<package_name>-messages-ui]
file_filter = <package_name>/assets/semantic-ui/translations/<package_name>/messages/<lang>/messages.po
source_file = <package_name>/assets/semantic-ui/translations/<package_name>/translations.pot
source_lang = en
type = PO

```

where:
- `i18next.js` is your translation configuration
- `i18next-scanner.config.js` is translation string scanner configuration
- `compileCatalog.js` is a script transforming Transifex `*.po` output translations into `.json` files used by react
- `initCatalog.js` is a script initializing a new language configuration
- `package.json` configuration and dependencies of the translation mini-app

example content of above files available [here](https://github.com/inveniosoftware/invenio-app-rdm/tree/v8.0.0.dev4/invenio_app_rdm/theme/assets/semantic-ui/translations/invenio_app_rdm): 

##### Usage

Install i18n dev dependencies via (dependencies from package.json)
```
npm install 
```
Now run to add a new language
```
npm run init_catalog lang <your_new_lang_two_letters_abbreviation>
```

Now run
```
npm run extract_messages
```

This command will gather all the marked strings from .js files, group them by their ID and place everything in the source file specified in the config (usually at `<package_name>/theme/assets/semantic-ui/translations/<package_name>/translations.pot`).

Update the ./messages/index.js file to add the configuration of your new language to the react translation configuration map
```javascript
import TRANSLATE_<lang> from './<lang>/translations.json'
export const translations = {
...rest,
<lang>: { translation: TRANSLATE_<lang> }
}
```

If you don't already have it, install the python transifex client. You will need also the transifex.com account and your private API key
```shell
pip install transifex-client
```

Push translation sources (.pot and .po) to transifex. It will add the missing strings to the translation awaiting list.
```shell
tx push -s -t
```

For the next step you need to have some translations done on the Transifex website. Otherwise next step will not be successfully done, because there won't be no translated content to work with. Translations are stored under the namespace defined in your `.tx/config` file
Pull translations from Transifex:
```shell
tx pull -l <lang>
```
You can use `-f` to overwrite existing `.po` files. After this step you should see new `.po` files pulled to `package_name>/theme/assets/semantic-ui/translations/<package_name>/messages/<lang>/` folder. If there are no new files, the translations were empty.

Compile the `.json` files for react to use.
```shell
npm run compile_catalog
npm run compile_catalog lang <lang> # for specific language
```


