# S3 compatible storage backend

_Introduced in v13_

InvenioRDM provides seamless integration with S3-compatible object storage systems. This allows institutions to leverage scalable, cost-effective, and highly durable cloud storage solutions for their research data, ensuring secure and efficient management of digital assets.

## S3 via MinIO
[MinIO](https://min.io/) is a high-performance, open-source object storage system that is API compatible with Amazon S3.

!!! info "S3 selected"
    This section assumes you chose S3 when bootstrapping the instance.

!!! warning "License compatibility"
    The MinIO Object Store is licensed under Affero General Public License Version 3 (AGPLv3), see the [compliance page](https://min.io/compliance). When using MinIO, make sure that your instance's license is compliant.

After having setup your MinIO application, you can review the settings below.

### Bucket and data location
A default bucket (`default`) is created automatically in your MinIO container. This bucket will be used as the default files' location for your InvenioRDM instance.

If you want to change the bucket name, open a shell window and type `pipenv run invenio files location s3-default s3://new-bucket --default`. You will also need to manually create the new bucket in minio or your S3 storage system. The new bucket will only be used for new records or drafts (existing drafts and records will use `default`).

### Credentials
The last step is to set your credentials so your instance can authenticate against the S3 container.

By default, the `ROOT_USER` and the `ROOT_USER_PASSWORD` of MinIO are "CHANGE_ME". For security reasons, you should change them. This will require you to:

- Stop your services by using the CLI: `invenio-cli services stop` (Or stop only your MinIO container).
- In the `docker-services.yaml` file change the `MINIO_ROOT_USER` and `MINIO_ROOT_PASSWORD` values.
- Update the credentials:
    - You should be using environment variables to inject secrets. Define `INVENIO_S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID` for the user and `INVENIO_S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` for the password.
    - If you are developing locally, you can change your `invenio.cfg` and set the user to `S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and the password to `S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`.
- Start your services: `invenio-cli services start`.

It's done! Ready to roll!

## Amazon S3
If you're using Amazon S3, you'll want to provide the endpoint url and set the region if you're not using us-east-1 (the default) like

```
S3_ENDPOINT_URL='https://s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/'
S3_REGION_NAME='us-west-2'
```

To enable file previews in InvenioRDM when using Amazon S3, you must configure CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing) for your S3 bucket. In the AWS console, navigate to your bucket's permissions tab and add:
```
[
    {
        "AllowedHeaders": [],
        "AllowedMethods": [
            "GET"
        ],
        "AllowedOrigins": [
            "*"
        ],
        "ExposeHeaders": []
    }
]
```
