# Internationalization (i18n) and localization (l10n)

## Babel

## Marking strings for translation

In order to translate strings, they have to be marked. This ensures that they will be picked up by the extraction process later on. Only strings which are visible in the UI have to be translated.

### Python

!!! warning
Do not use `f-strings` for translatable text. Interpolation is not supported for these types of strings (see [Issue](https://github.com/python-babel/babel/issues/594)).

Instead, use `format`:
```diff
- _(f"Hi {username}")
+ _("Hi {username}".format(username=username))
```

Marking strings in python is done via the `Flask-BabelEx` package. First, make sure to import the package and the `*gettext` function. We usually import it as `_` to be consistent throughout different packages.

```python
from flask_babelex import lazy_gettext as _
```

Now strings can be marked for translation:

```python
error_message = _("Invalid scheme")
```

Certain data, identifiers or keywords do not have to be translated. This can be achieved with string interpolation:

```python
_("Invalid {scheme}").format(scheme)
```

Adding notes for translators helps them to better understand the context where this string will be used:

```python
# NOTE: This is displayed in ....
_("Invalid {scheme}").format(scheme)
```

#### Jinja Templates

The `gettext` function is made available in jinja templates as well:

```js
<p>
    {{ _('Only published versions are displayed.') }}
</p>
```

### JavaScript

Marking strings in JavaScript is done via the `i18next` module. First, make sure to import `i18next` from the module.

```js
import { i18next } from "@translations/invenio_app_rdm/i18next";
```

Now strings can be marked for translation:

```js
<p>{i18next.t("Only published versions are displayed.")}</p>
```

For strings containg HTML/React nodes, the `Trans` component is the way to go ([full documentation](https://react.i18next.com/latest/trans-component)):

```
import { Trans } from '@translations/i18next';

const title = record.title;
<Trans>
    The record {{ title }} can <b>only</b> be accessed by <b>users specified</b> in the permissions.
</Trans>
```

For more complex strings, custom variables can be passed to the `Trans` component as well.

```
<Trans
    defaults="On <bold>{{ date }}</bold> the record and the files will automatically be made publicly accessible. Until then, the record and the files can <bold>only</bold> be accessed by <bold>users specified</bold> in the permissions."
    values={{ date: fmtDate }}
    components={{ bold: <b /> }}
/>
```

This will interpolate the nodes from the `values` and `components` properties and is a good approach, if the nodes are to be used multiple times.

#### Singular & Plural

Sometimes, certain words or phrases in a sentence change based on a number or the amount of objects. There is also support for this, by passing the `count` property.

```javascript
const records = [{ title: "Record 1" }, { title: "Record 2" },];

<Trans
    i18nKey="numberOfRecords"
    count={records.length}>
    There are {{ count: records.length }} records.
</Trans>

```

This will generate the following two ids for translation:

```json
{
    "numberOfRecords": "There is one record.",
    "numberOfRecords_plural": "There are {{ count }} records."
}
```

Given that you must use the reserved property `count`, the translation is different when having to translate sentences that have multiple (nested) plurals, e.g. `2 views, 1 download`.
In this case, you will have to (see official documentation [here](https://www.i18next.com/translation-function/nesting#passing-options-to-nestings)):

1. in your code, define the translated string as a key only, with all the params:
```javascript
i18next.t("viewsAndDownloads", { views: uniqueViews, downloads: uniqueDownloads })
```
2. make sure that the translation keys are defined, with interpolation, using the `count` reserved variable:
```json
{
    "viewsAndDownloads": "$t(views, {\"count\": {{views}} }), $t(downloads, {\"count\": {{downloads}} })",
    "views": "{{count}} view",
    "views_plural": "{{count}} views",
    "downloads": "{{count}} download",
    "downloads_plural": "{{count}} downloads"
}
```

## Lazy vs non-lazy

Coming soon

## Storage of strings and timestamps

Strings should be stored in `UTF-8`.
Timestamps should be stored in UTC and localized when displayed.

### EDTF localization

The EDTF (Extended Date Time Format) is used when dealing with imprecise dates and for their region specific display.

#### Python

Here we make use of the `babel-edtf` module. It allows to pass the locale to the `format_edtf` function. As always, make sure to import it before you use it.

```python
from babel_edtf import format_edtf

format_edtf('2020-01', locale='en')
'Jan 2020'
```

It also allows to pass a certain format (one of: `short`, `medium`, `long`, `full`):

```python
format_edtf('2020-01/2020-09', format='long', locale='en')
'January – September 2020'
```

## Extracting Strings

After strings have been marked for translation, it is now time to extract them. Instructions on how to do so can be found in the respective package in the file located at `.tx/config`. Depending on the package, only Python or JavaScript may be available for translation.

### Python

#### Configuration

- In the root folder of your package update the `.tx/config` file:

```
[main]
host = https://www.transifex.com

# python conf
[<parent_namespace_of_your_transifex_projext>.<package_name>-messages]
file_filter = <package_name>/translations/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/messages.po
source_file = <package_name>/translations/messages.pot
source_lang = en
type = PO
```

- also in the root folder add `babel.ini` if not there:

```
# Extraction from Python source files
[python: **.py]
encoding = utf-8

# Extraction from Jinja2 templates
[jinja2: **/templates/**.html]
encoding = utf-8
extensions = jinja2.ext.autoescape, jinja2.ext.with_
```

- also in the root folder add these configuration line in `setup.cfg` if not there:

```
[compile_catalog]
directory = <package_name>/translations/
use-fuzzy = True
```

- remember to add this line for `MANIFEST.in`

```
recursive-include <package_name> *.po *.pot *.mo
```

- also the entypoint in `setup.py`

```bash
    entry_points={
    ....
            'invenio_i18n.translations': [
            'messages = <package_name>',
        ],
    },
```

- remember to add your new language to the instance configuration by modifying `I18N_LANGUAGES` variable, e.g. `I18N_LANGUAGES = [('de', _('German'))]`

##### Usage

In the root folder of the package run

```
python setup.py extract_messages
```

This command will gather all the marked strings from .py and jinja template files, group them by their ID and place everything in the source file specified in the config (usually at `<package_name>/translations/messages.pot`).

Push translation sources (.pot and .po) to transifex. It will add the missing strings to the translation awaiting list.

```shell
tx push -s -t
```

> **_NOTE:_** When there is no resource for this package on transifex, one will be created automatically on the first push.

For the next step you need to have some translations done on the Transifex website. Otherwise next step will not be successfully done, because there will be no translated content to work with. Translations are stored under the namespace defined in your `.tx/config` file.

Pull translations from Transifex:

```shell
tx pull -l <lang>
```

### JavaScript

#### Configuration

Navigate to the `<package_name>/theme/assets/semantic-ui/translations/<package_name>` folder.
Create following folder and file structure:

```
|-messages/
           |-index.js
|-scripts/
           |-compileCatalog.js
           |-initCatalog.js
|-i18next.js
|-i18next-scanner.config.js
|-package.json
```

in the root folder of your package update the `.tx/config` file:

```
[main]
host = https://www.transifex.com

# React conf
[<parent_namespace_of_your_transifex_projext>.<package_name>-messages-ui]
file_filter = <package_name>/assets/semantic-ui/translations/<package_name>/messages/<lang>/messages.po
source_file = <package_name>/assets/semantic-ui/translations/<package_name>/translations.pot
source_lang = en
type = PO

```

where:

- `i18next.js` is your translation configuration
- `i18next-scanner.config.js` is translation string scanner configuration
- `compileCatalog.js` is a script transforming Transifex `*.po` output translations into `.json` files used by React
- `initCatalog.js` is a script initializing a new language configuration
- `package.json` configuration and dependencies of the translation mini-app

example content of above files available [here](https://github.com/inveniosoftware/invenio-app-rdm/tree/v8.0.0.dev4/invenio_app_rdm/theme/assets/semantic-ui/translations/invenio_app_rdm):

##### Usage

Install i18n dev dependencies via (dependencies from package.json)

```
npm install
```

Now run to add a new language

```
npm run init_catalog lang <your_new_lang_two_letters_abbreviation>
```

Now run

```
npm run extract_messages
```

This command will gather all the marked strings from .js files, group them by their ID and place everything in the source file specified in the config (usually at `<package_name>/theme/assets/semantic-ui/translations/<package_name>/translations.pot`).

Update the ./messages/index.js file to add the configuration of your new language to the React translation configuration map

```javascript
import TRANSLATE_<lang> from './<lang>/translations.json'
export const translations = {
...rest,
<lang>: { translation: TRANSLATE_<lang> }
}
```

If you don't already have it, install the python transifex client. You will need also the transifex.com account and your private API key

```shell
pip install transifex-client
```

Push translation sources (.pot and .po) to transifex. It will add the missing strings to the translation awaiting list.

```shell
tx push -s -t
```

> **_NOTE:_** When there is no resource for this package on transifex, one will be created automatically on the first push.

For the next step you need to have some translations done on the Transifex website. Otherwise next step will not be successfully done, because there won't be no translated content to work with. Translations are stored under the namespace defined in your `.tx/config` file
Pull translations from Transifex:

```shell
tx pull -l <lang>
```

You can use `-f` to overwrite existing `.po` files. After this step you should see new `.po` files pulled to `package_name>/theme/assets/semantic-ui/translations/<package_name>/messages/<lang>/` folder. If there are no new files, the translations were empty.

Compile the `.json` files for React to use.

```shell
npm run compile_catalog
npm run compile_catalog lang <lang> # for specific language
```

### Invenio-CLI

In addition, if you want to translate strings from your `invenio.cfg` file or the code in your instance's _site_ folder you can do so with the invenio-cli. Note that this workflow also enables you to overwrite translations from any other existing module's string.

#### Extract messages catalog

In your instance there is a `translations` folder. The first step would be to extract the strings to a message catalog:

```bash
invenio-cli translations extract
```

Running this command will generate the corresponding `.pot` file:

```
/translations
 |- babel.ini
 |- messages.pot
```

!!! note "Absolute Paths in Localization Files"
    Absolute paths in `messages.po` and `messages.pot` are comments for human reading context. They don't affect the compiled `.mo` file or app behavior.

#### Initialize a message catalog for a locale

The second step is to initialize the catalog for the specific locale of your choice.
These locales are the keys of the `I18N_LANGUAGES` configuration variable. For example, for _German_ would be:

```cfg
# invenio.cfg file
I18N_LANGUAGES = [
    ('de', _('German')),
]
```

```bash
invenio-cli translations init -l de
```

Running this command will produce the corresponding `.po` files:

```
/translations
 |- babel.ini
 |- messages.pot
 |- de/LC_MESSAGES
     |- messages.po
```

#### Compile the catalogs

Finally, you need to compile the catalogs. That can be achieved with the `translations` command.
However, this process is also a part of the _setup_ process so it will be executed when running `invenio-cli services setup` (or its containerized counter part).

```bash
invenio-cli translations compile
```

Running this command will produce the corresponding `.mo` files:

```
/translations
 |- babel.ini
 |- messages.pot
 |- de/LC_MESSAGES
     |- messages.po
     |- messages.mo
```
