# S3 as Storage backend

## I chose S3 when initializing the repository!

If you are reading the section you are lucky! you will only have to perform a few configuration changes. If on the contrary you didn't choose S3 as storage when initializing the repository file system, [navigate below](#i-didnt-choose-s3-when-initializing) to follow more in depth changes!

### Create a bucket

InvenioRDM uses a [minio](https://min.io/download) container for S3 alike storage. To create a bucket in minio you can:

a. Install the [mc tool](https://docs.min.io/docs/minio-client-quickstart-guide.html) and run the following command, where `defaul-bucket` is the name of your bucket.

``` console
$ mc mb default-bucket
```

b. Use the web UI (https://localhost[:9000]/minio). In the bottom right you will see a `+` sign, click there and add a new bucket.

### Create a new location

Now you need to tell InvenioRDM where is that bucket, for that create a new location. If you are running a local (development) instance, run:

``` console
$ cd path/to/your/instance
$ pipenv run invenio files location s3-default s3://default-bucket --default
```

If you are running the containerized version, run:

``` console
$ docker exec -it < web_[api|ui] container name or id> /bin/bash
$ invenio files location s3-default s3://default-bucket --default
```

### Set your credentials

The last step is to set your credentials so your instance can authenticate against the S3 container.

By default the `ACCESS_KEY` and the `ACCESS_ID` of minio are "CHANGE_ME", and so they are set in the `invenio.cfg` file. If you changed them (you should) modify them accordingly in the config file.

It's done! Ready to roll!

## I didn't choose S3 when initializing

You are here, but do not panic, is not difficult just longer.

This docs will come soon, for now we apologize for the hussle, but could you create a new instance to test S3?